# Capstone-project
This is the capstone project of Biostatistics.

Lumbar spinal stenosis is a common cause of spine-related disability and functional limitations among older adults, leading to suffering back and leg pain, depression and weakness. The prevention of such symptoms is difficult, and the effectiveness of a widely used treatment, epidural glucocorticoid injections, has been shown to be questionable. Previous research found that there were no significant between-group differences in either self-reported disability or self-reported back pain at 6 weeks. Our goal for this project is to further understand how the effectiveness of epidural glucocorticoid injections for spinal stenosis may vary across patients - a concept described as Heterogeneity of Treatment Effects (HTE).

In traditional randomized controlled trials (RCTs), evaluating heterogeneity of treatment effects (HTE) is typically conducted through subgroup analysis contrasting effects in groups of patients defined one variable at a time (e.g. males versus females; old versus young). There are important limitations of these “one variable at a time” analyses, such as low statistical power and potential inflation of the type I error rate due to multiple statistical comparisons. Therefore, we are interested in adopting risk modeling approaches that account for multiple variables at the same time, one of the strategies suggested in the Predictive Approaches to Treatment effect Heterogeneity (PATH) statement. 

Our ultimate goal was to develop a framework for risk-based assessment of HTE for Lumbar Epidural Steroid Injections for Spinal Stenosis (LESS) trial following the PATH statement recommendations. To be more specific, our first aim was to develop and validate a model in an external dataset to generate risk scores. In our study, we chose the Back-Pain Outcomes Using Longitudinal Data (BOLD) Cohort，which consisted of rich baseline measurements collected from patient-reported outcomes (PROs) and electronic health data (EHR). Our second aim was to create risk scores for patients in the  LESS trial using the selected model in Aim 1. We treated the risk score as a pre-specified derived covariate to stratify those patients and explored risk-based variation in treatment effects by evaluating whether the effectiveness of epidural glucocorticoid injections is modified by the risk scores. This HTE analysis would provide valuable insight to comprehensively assess the effectiveness and safety of epidural glucocorticoid injections. 
